# EC5-fuel-calibrator
Fuel Gauge recalibration project for the 8th-generation Mitsubishi Galant and Legnum VR4 (chassis codes EC5A and EC5W).  Likely, the project will also function for the Lancer Evolution, models 1 through 9 (I through IX).  The project currently uses an Arduino Nano Every coupled with a custom PCB shield.  The Nano Every has been selected as this board has its own on-board monolithic power supply chip which reduces the number of components required on the PCB and works well in automotive environments.  It is also capable of providing 1.2 amps on its +5v output, which exceeds the capabilities of an LM7805 linear voltage regulator.

## Issues with the stock fuel gauge circuitry
The stock fuel gauge on these cars is extremely inaccurate due to the use of a simple *linear* analogue gauge that reacts to a change in resistance of two rheostats (upper and lower) in the fuel tank which are wired in-series.  The entire setup of the rheostats in series is a "quick and dirty" attempt to use the same fuel gauge as on the 2WD models of these cars, as those vehicles use a single rheostat with a range of 4-112 ohms.  The rheostats on the VR4 range from 2-41.5 ohms and 2-65.5 ohms, respectively, for a combined total of ~107 ohms in an attempt to make the gauge work.  

The combination of the following two design decisions results in *non-linear* fuel levels from the fuel senders:
- Rheostats in Series
- Saddle tank design

### Rheostats in series
The two rheostats in the fuel tank are labelled as "main" and "secondary" in the Mitsubishi wiring diagrams, which refers to the upper and lower rheostat.  There are upper and lower fuel sender rheostats because the fuel tank is a "couch" design where when viewed from side-on, the fuel tank has the shape of a couch, with a flat lower section and an almost vertical upper section.  The fuel tank can be described as saddling the driveshaft, whilst also angling up beneath the base of the rear passenger seats.  Between a full tank and just below 3/4 of a tank, the lower rheostat float remains "pegged" at its highest level.  Only once the top portion of the fuel tank has been consumed and the lower rheostat float starts to drop does this lower rheostat become useful.  

#### Upper rheostat
The upper rheostat has full travel between the bottom of the tank (on the left side of the saddle) and the top of the tank.  There is overlap of data between the two rheostats, and this overlap further messes with the attempt to use twho rheostats to mimic the behaviour of one rheostat (as used on the 2WD cars).

### Saddle tank design
The VR4 fuel tank uses a saddle design where the middle of the tank has a "hump" in the bottom to allow for the driveshaft to reach the rear differential.  The right side of the saddle design has the fuel pump and one of the fuel sender rheostats. The left side of the saddle has the low fuel switch, the "upper" rheostat and the pickup for the jet pipe.

#### Jet pipe
To avoid fuel starvation and fuel being stuck in the side of the tank where there is no fuel pump, the fuel delivery system makes use of a "jet pipe" (venturi pump) located in the left side of the tank.  As fuel returns to the tank from the fuel pressure rail (after the fuel pressure regulator) the returning fuel passes by a venturi which connects to the jet pipe.  The vaccum generated by this venturi does what it can to constantly keep pumping fuel back over from the left side of the tank into the side where the fuel pump is.  Hard turns to the right when cornering can cause all this work to be undone as the fuel sloshes back over the saddle to the left side of the tank. Note that we do not know the flow rate of the jet pipe so it is difficult to determine how **much** of a problem this causes.  

*It is known that on high powered AWD Mitsubishi Lancers, the return line that passes by the venturi can be too restrictive, causing excessive fuel pressures in the fuel rail (e.g., 60 psi at idle).  Drilling out this line is a common change, but the venturi must not be over-drilled as this will stop the jet pipe from functioning and cause fuel starvation at the pump.*

### Low fuel light
The low fuel light circuit is separate from the fuel senders used and behaves inconsistently to the stock fuel gauge.  It is based on an NTC resistor mounted next to the fuel pump which allows current to flow through the Low Fuel bulb if it heats up in the absence of being cooled by fuel.  From factory, this resistor is wired in series with the low fuel switch.  If the low fuel switch (essentially a float-controlled switch) on the left side of the tank is activated, the circuit is closed and the low fuel resistor is now in-circuit with the low fuel warning light.  When this resistor is only partially immersed in fuel (or not at all), it will begin to heat up and reduce its resistance, causing the low fuel light to shine at various brightness levels based on how much the resistor is being cooled or not.  It is a very blunt instrument and not greatly useful.  A very bright light is supposed to generally indicate very low fuel.

Because this low fuel light system is decoupled from the fuel gauge, its activation does not correlate with the gauge and, from the perspective of the driver, behave erratically.  In some cases, such as during cornering, the low fuel light might be on and then suddenly switch off completely rather than "dim out".  This is caused by fuel sloshing back over the tank saddle to the left side of the tank and causing the low fuel switch to disconnect.

### Summary of issues
From the perspective of measuring fuel remaining in the tank this entire stock system is imperfect, because the fuel gauge has no way of knowing how much fuel might be in the left or side of the tank with any real accuracy.  As a result, we can end up in one of a few less than optimal situations.  The fuel gauge may incorrectly report low fuel, or more fuel than is available, and may drop inconsistently.  The inconsistent fuel gauge behaviour may manifest as:
* Rapidly dropping when there has been no change in driving behaviour
* Not dropping for a long period of time (e.g., "hanging") even though a long distance has been travelled
* Hanging, followed by a sudden drop

In particular, "hanging" of the fuel gauge needle is common once the upper fuel sender rheostat has bottomed out.  This is because the remaining sender rheostat is in the right side of the fuel tank which is constantly being "topped up" by the jet pipe system which is pulling fuel from the left-side of the tank.


## Baseline code for gauge calibration
The baseline code (simple-table) uses a simple table of value ranges that control a PWM signal.  The fuel sender rheostat signal is measured using a 5V voltage source and voltage divider connect to Arduino pin #0.  Knowing that the signals from the rheostats are not linear, the signal received by the Arduino is compared to a lookup table.  To make the gauge read (more) accurately than stock, each row in the lookup table is assigned a PWM value which drives the switching of a MOSFET connected to Arduino Pin #5.  The switching of this MOSFET controls the average current flowing through the fuel gauge, which allows the PWM control to accurately force the needle to a desired position.

This code is coupled with a custom Arduino Shield which interfaces the Arduino to the wiring harness of the car, for power + ground and intercepting the fuel gauge and rheostat connections.  This code provides an improved fuel gauge, but it is not to our satisfaction and an enhancement to the calibration project is being developed.

### Baseline Prototype circuit
*Note that the baseline Prototype circuit uses a legacy design based off the classic Arduino using an ATMega328*

[Prototype Circuit](https://github.com/Kaldek/EC5-fuel-calibrator/blob/main/Fuel%20gauge%20prototype-2.jpg?raw=true)

[Prototype Shield](https://github.com/Kaldek/EC5-fuel-calibrator/blob/main/Prototype%20Shield.jpg?raw=true)

## Enhanced code
The enhanced code will be written once the PCB prototype has been completed and we have obtained accurate readings from the upper and lower rheostats independently, along with validating this data.  This enhanced design intercepts the rheostats separately as dedicated signals (2-41 ohms and 2-65 ohms), allowing for increased gauge accuracy, and also allows for direct control over the low fuel warning light.  The low fuel warning light circuit on the VR4 is separate to to the fuel gauge circuit, allowing us to control this circuit.

### Enhanced calibration behaviour
The enhanced design performs the following circuit changes:
 - Decouple the upper and lower rheostats and read them individually
 - Remove all use of the stock low fuel light circuitry, except for driving the low fuel light based on software control

These changes instruct the Arduino to use an altered fuel table which uses a combination of signals from the two fuel sender rheostats. 
